\section{Natural Language, Effects, and Movement}

In sections \autoref{sec:introduction} and
\autoref{sec:display-calculus} we presented a simple type-logical
grammar, and its encoding as a display calculus. In this section, we
will study extensions of the syntactic and semantic calculi, which
will allow us to analyse more linguistic phenomena.

Since its original formulation by \citet{lambek1961}, many variants of
the Lambek calculus have been proposed
\citep{steedman1988,moortgat2012,morrill2011,kubota2012,barker2015}.
However, none have yet become truly canonical.
Recently, \citet{moot2015} has begun comparing these extended calculi,
as fragments of first-order linear logic. In time, this may yield a
canonically agreed-upon extension to NL.

\lamET, too, has been extended and revisited many times. Many of its
extensions were created to deal with complex semantic phenomena, such
as intensionality~\citep{winter2009},
expressives~\citep{potts2003,mccready2010,gutzmann2011}, dynamic
semantics~\citep{groenendijk1995}, and quantifier
raising~\citep{barker2015}. \todo{Other important work?}
In \citeyear{shan2002}, \citeauthor{shan2002} proposed an interesting
paradigm to unify these extensions: by implementing them using
techniques for effectful functional programming in \lamET.

Below, we will briefly discuss \citeauthor{shan2002}'s proposed
extensions to \lamET and its limitations. We will then turn our
attention to the extensions made to NL, and see how they can remedy
the limitations of the extended \lamET. We will conclude this section
by giving our own extensions to NL, and showing that they preserve the
properties we expect of a grammar logic (i.e. admissibility of cut,
and a decidable and complete proof search procedure).

\input{monads-and-extensible-effects}
